# Thinking in React

## Learning Objectives

- Decompose a React user interface into a hierarchy of components, identifying parent-child relationships and data flow patterns.
- Construct a static version of a React application, implementing components that render UI based on a data model using props.
- Evaluate and determine the minimal set of mutable state required for a React application, placing it in the appropriate components to maintain a unidirectional data flow.

## <a href="https://react.dev/learn/thinking-in-react" target="_blank">Thinking In React</a>

Developing a user interfaces in React can be challenging. Instead of looking at a webpage as a whole, you should instead split it into sections or components, at this stage we can consider the states required for each component to correctly render as intended. To ensure that data follows correctly you then need to connect your components pass information or functions from parents to children.

>** ADD CONTEXT **

1. <a href="https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_json_intro.asp" target="_blank">JSON</a> (JavaScript Object Notation) is a data format similar to JavaScript Objects, except can be used in text or file form. An API (Application Programming Interface) is typically a URL that manipulates and/or returns data. A JSON API is an API that returns data in JSON format, one of the most common formats to send and receive data on the internet.
2. Notice the example and how it passes updater function and state from the parent to the child, such that we can control and alter state.
