# 3.E.1: Bigfoot JSON

## Learning Objectives

1. Understand how to set up Express server to receive requests and respond with data
2. Understand how to set up CORS to allow access to server from different origin server

## Introduction

We will build an app that records and displays <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bigfoot" target="_blank">Bigfoot</a> sightings with an Express backend. We will build on this app in coming exercises to incorporate SQL and Sequelize.

## Setup

1. Fork and clone the <a href="https://github.com/rocketacademy/bigfoot-json-backend-bootcamp" target="_blank">Rocket Academy Bigfoot JSON Backend repo</a>
2. Fork and clone the <a href="https://github.com/rocketacademy/bigfoot-frontend-3.2" target="_blank">Rocket Academy Bigfoot Frontend repo</a>
3. Copy and paste `.env.sample` into the repository
4. Rename the duplicate file to `.env`
5. Change the `PORT` environment variable to 3000

## Base: Retrieve Sightings

### Starter Code

#### JSON Backend Repo

Rocket has provided starter code in `index.js` that responds to server requests to `/sightings` with all sighting data. The utilities module `utils.js` exports a function `getSightings` that reads sightings data from `sightings.json`. We are using `sightings.json` in lieu of a database because we have not yet learnt SQL, and in coming exercises we will replace `sightings.json` with a SQL database.

To run the backend server, install packages with `npm i` and run the script `node index.js`. This will start the server at `localhost:3000`.

#### Frontend Repo

Rocket has provided generic starter code for us to customise for Bigfoot. We will use this frontend repo for all Bigfoot exercises, even after switching to SQL in our backend.

To run the frontend repo, run `npm i` to install packages and `npm run dev` to compile our files and then open the browser of your choice at the site "http://localhost5173".&#x20;

### Retrieve sighting data in frontend from backend

1. Verify the backend API `/sightings` is working as expected by starting the backend server as per above instructions and sending a request to `localhost:3000` in Thunder Client. The API request  is `localhost:3000/sightings` it should respond with all sightings in JSON format.
2. Write code in our frontend app to query the backend API on component mount and render all sightings on the page. Feel free to only render basic info for each sighting such as year, season and month. Remember to store sightings in state, which will trigger a re-render, instead of trying to query the backend API on every render, which would be inefficient.
   1. If using `useEffect`, consider passing a <a href="https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-effect.html#tip-optimizing-performance-by-skipping-effects" target="_blank">dependency array as a 2nd parameter</a> to `useEffect` to optimise performance and prevent unnecessary renders.
3. Add `cors` to our backend. Without `cors` we may notice that the data is not loading in our frontend, and we get the following error in our browser console: "Access to XMLHttpRequest at 'http://localhost:3000/' from origin 'http://localhost:3001' has been blocked by CORS policy: No 'Access-Control-Allow-Origin' header is present on the requested resource."

### Retrieve individual sighting data

Render basic sighting info for each sighting in the sightings list on the homepage. When we click on an individual sighting, navigate to a separate page that renders the full data for that specific sighting.

1. Create a new route in the backend `/sightings/:sightingIndex` that returns data for the sighting at the sighting index in URL params. Sighting index refers to the sighting's index in `sightings.json` in the backend.
2. Use React Router to implement frontend routing for the homepage and individual sighting pages, and include a back button on the individual sighting pages to go back to the homepage
   1. Consider using <a href="https://remix.run/docs/en/v1/guides/routing#what-is-nested-routing" target="_blank">nested routes</a> to re-use UI logic, <a href="https://reactrouter.com/en/6.6.1/hooks/use-params" target="_blank">URL params</a> to retrieve individual sighting indexes from URLs, and an <a href="https://reactrouter.com/en/main/route/route#index" target="_blank">index route</a> to render the full sighting list. You can also use <a href="https://reactrouter.com/en/main/hooks/use-search-params" target="_blank">useSearchParams</a> to update your frontend URL.
   2. Rocket recommends the frontend route `/sightings/:sightingIndex` for individual sighting routes for clarity of communication
   3. Consider using <a href="https://reactrouter.com/en/6.6.1/components/link" target="_blank">`Link` components</a> to navigate between pages
3. When we navigate directly to the URL for an individual sighting, e.g. `localhost:5173/sightings/1`, render that specific sighting's page.

### Store backend URL in constant variable

We will store a single instance of our backend URL `BACKEND_URL` in a new file `constants.jsx` that we reference everywhere we need the backend URL. We do this because our backend URL will change depending on whether we run our app locally or in production, and we do not want to update a hard-coded backend URL in our code every time we switch between local and production environments, nor declare redundant logic to determine the correct backend URL in each component that uses the backend URL.

When we deploy our app to production in later exercises we can write logic in `constants.jsx` to set `BACKEND_URL` based on the value of Vitejs built-in environment variable <a href="https://vitejs.dev/guide/env-and-mode.html" target="_blank">`import.meta.env.VITE_SOME_NODE_ENV`</a>.  `NODE_ENV` will tell us which development environment we are in ("development", "test", or "production"), allowing us to set `BACKEND_URL` accordingly.

For now, create a new file `constants.jsx` and add the following content.

```javascript
export const BACKEND_URL = "http://localhost:3000";
```

Then update all references to `http://localhost:3000` in our components to import and use the `BACKEND_URL` constant variable.

## Comfortable: Filter Sightings

Create filter functionality in frontend UI that allows users to filter sightings by their attributes. For example, filtering by the year 1990 would render only sightings in 1990. Use <a href="https://reactrouter.com/en/6.6.1/hooks/use-params" target="_blank">URL search params</a> to reflect filter settings in the URL.

Update the backend root route `/sightings` to retrieve only the filtered data (if there is a filter) using URL query parameters. Do not retrieve all sightings from the backend and filter on the frontend.

## More Comfortable: Sort Sightings

Create sort functionality in frontend UI that allows users to sort sightings by specified sighting attributes and in either ascending or descending order. Sorting should happen in addition to filtering. Feel free to perform sorting on either frontend or backend, and if sorting is on backend, send the sort parameters as query parameters like what we did with the filter feature.

## Submission

Submit pull requests to the `main` branches of Rocket's Bigfoot Frontend and Bigfoot JSON Backend repos respectively, and share your PR links in your section Slack channel.

There is no need to deploy this exercise for now. We will build on it in upcoming Bigfoot exercises and replace our JSON database with a SQL database before deploying.

## Reference Solution

Here is reference code for the <a href="https://github.com/rocketacademy/bigfoot-frontend-3.2/tree/solution-json-base" target="_blank">frontend</a> and the <a href="https://github.com/rocketacademy/bigfoot-json-backend-bootcamp/blob/solution-base/index.js" target="_blank">backend</a> for this exercise. You can do better!
